Hey Wes, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
Thanks for having me.
You know, honestly, I feel like it's been a long time coming, having you on the show.
You've had such a big impact in the Python space, especially the data science side of that space.
It's high time to have you on the show, so welcome. Good to have you.
Yeah, it's great to be here.
I've been heads down a lot the last N years.
I actually haven't been, because I think a lot of my work has been more like data infrastructure
and working at even a lower level than Python.
So I haven't been engaging as much directly with the Python community.
But it's been great to kind of get back more involved and start catching up on all the things that people have been building.
So being at Posit gives me the ability to have more exposure to what's going on in people that are using Python in the real world.
Yeah, there's a ton of stuff going on at Posit that's super interesting, and we'll talk about some of that.
You know, sometimes it's just really fun to build and work with people building things.
I'm sure you're enjoying that aspect of it.
For sure.
Well, before we dive into Pandas and all the things that you've been working on after that,
let's just hear a quick bit about yourself for folks who don't know you.
Sure.
So, yeah, my name is Wes McKinney.
I grew up in Akron, Ohio, mostly, and I got involved, started getting involved in Python development around 2007, 2008.
I was working in quant finance at the time.
I started building a personal data analysis toolkit that turned into the Pandas project, and then open-sourced that in 2009.
I started getting involved in the Python community, and I spent several years writing my book, Python for Data Analysis,
and then working with the broader scientific Python data science community to help enable Python to become a mainstream programming language
for doing data analysis and data science.
And in the meantime, I've become an entrepreneur.
I've started some companies and have been working to, you know, innovate and improve the computing infrastructure
that powers data science tools and libraries like Pandas.
So that's led to some other projects like Apache Arrow and Ibis and some other things.
And, yeah, in recent years, I've worked on a startup, Voltron Data, which is still, you know, very much going strong
and has a big team and is off to the races.
And I've had a long relationship with Posit, formerly RStudio, and they were my home for doing Arrow development from 2018 to 2020.
They helped me incubate the startup that became Voltron Data.
And so I've gone back to work full-time there as a software architect to help them with their Python strategy
to make sort of their data science platform a delight to use for the Python user base.
I'm pretty impressed with what they're doing.
I don't realize the connection between Voltron and Posit, but I have had Joe Chung on the show before to talk about Shiny for Python.
And I've seen him demo a few really interesting things, how it integrates into notebooks these days,
some of the stuff that you all are doing.
And, yeah, it's fascinating.
Maybe give people a quick elevator pitch on that while we're on that subject.
On Shiny or on Posit in general?
Yeah, whichever you feel like.
Yeah, so Posit started out 2009 as RStudio, and so it didn't start out intending to be a company.
JJ Allaire and Joe Chung built a new IDE, Integrated Development Environment, for R
because what was available at the time wasn't great.
They made that into, I think, probably one of the best data science IDEs that's ever been built.
It's really an amazing piece of tech.
So it started becoming a company with customers and revenue in the 2013 time frame,
and they've built a whole suite of tools to support enterprise data science teams to make open-source data science work in the real world.
But the company itself, it's a certified B corporation, has no plans to go public or IPO.
It is dedicated to the mission of open-source software for data science and technical communication,
and basically building itself to be a 100-year company that has a revenue-generating enterprise product side
and an open-source side so that the open-source feeds the enterprise part of the business.
The enterprise part of the business generates revenue to support the open-source development,
and the goal is to be able to sustainably support the mission of open-source data science for hopefully the rest of our lives.
It's an amazing company.
It's been one of the most successful companies that dedicates a large fraction of its engineering time to open-source software development.
I'm very impressed with the company and JJ Allaire, its founder.
I'm excited to be helping it grow and become a sustainable long-term fixture in the ecosystem.
It's definitely doing cool stuff.
Incentives are aligned well.
It's not private equity or IPO.
I think it helps.
Many people know JJ Allaire created ColdFusion, which is the original dynamic web development framework in the 1990s.
He and his brother Jeremy and some others built AllaireCorp to commercialize ColdFusion.
They built a successful software business that was acquired by Macromedia, which was eventually acquired by Adobe.
He did go public as AllaireCorp during the dot-com bubble, and JJ went on to found a couple of other successful startups.
I think he found himself in his late 30s 15 years ago, or around the age I am now, having been very successful as an entrepreneur,
no need to make money, and looking for a mission to spend the rest of his career on.
Identifying data science and statistical computing as open-source, in particular making open-source for data science work,
was the mission that he aligned with and something that he had been interested in earlier in his career,
but he had gotten busy with other things.
I think it's really refreshing to work with people who are really mission-focused and focused on making impact in the world,
creating great software, empowering people, increasing accessibility, and making most of it available for free on the Internet,
and not being so focused on empire building and producing great profits for venture investors and things like that.
I think the goal of the company is to provide an amazing home for top-tier software developers to work on this software,
to spend their careers, and to build families, and to be a happy and healthy culture for working on this type of software.
That sounds excellent. Very cool. I didn't realize the history all the way back to ColdFusion.
Speaking of history, let's jump in. There's a possibility that people out there listening don't know what Pandas is.
You would think it's pretty ubiquitous, and I certainly would say that it is, especially in the data science space,
but I've got a bunch of listeners who listen, and they say really surprising things.
They'll say stuff to me like, Michael, I've been listening for six weeks now,
and I'm starting to understand some of the stuff you all are talking about.
Why did you listen for six weeks? You didn't know what I was talking about. That's crazy.
A lot of people use it as language immersion to get into the Python space.
I'm sure there's plenty of people out there who are immersing themselves but are pretty new.
Maybe for that crew, we could introduce what Pandas is.
Absolutely. It's a data manipulation and analysis toolkit for Python.
It's a Python library that you install that enables you to read data files,
so read many different types of data files off of disk or off of remote storage
or read data out of a database or some other remote data storage system.
This is tabular data, so it's structured data like with columns.
You can think of it like a spreadsheet or some other tabular data set.
Then it provides you with this DataFrame object, which is Pandas.DataFrame,
that is the main tabular data object.
It has a ton of methods for accessing, slicing, grabbing subsets of the data,
applying functions on it that do filtering and subsetting and selection
as well as more analytical operations like things that you might do with a database system or SQL,
so joins and lookups as well as analytical functions like summary statistics,
grouping by some key and producing summary statistics.
It's basically a Swiss army knife for doing data manipulation, data cleaning,
and supporting the data analysis workflow.
But it doesn't actually include very much as far as actual statistics or models
or if you're doing something with LLMs or linear regression
or some type of machine learning, you have to use another library,
but Pandas is the on-ramp for all of the data into your environment in Python.
So when people are building some kind of application that touches data in Python,
Pandas is often the initial on-ramp for how data gets into Python
where you clean up the data, you regularize it, you get it ready for analysis,
and then you feed the clean data into the downstream statistical library
or data analysis library that you're using.
That whole data wrangling side of things, right?
Yeah, that's right.
And so it's some history.
So Python had arrays like matrices and what we call tensors now,
multidimensional arrays going back all the way to 1995,
which is pretty early history for Python.
The Python programming language has only been around since 1990 or 1991,
if my memory serves.
But what became NumPy in 2005-2006 started out as numeric in 1995,
and it provided numerical computing, multidimensional arrays, matrices,
the kind of stuff that you might do in MATLAB,
but it was mainly focused on numerical computing
and not with the type of business data sets that you find in database systems
which contain a lot of strings or dates or non-numeric data.
And so my initial interest was I found Python
to be a really productive programming language.
I really liked writing code in it, writing simple scripts,
like doing random things for my job.
And you had this numerical computing library, NumPy,
which enabled you to work with large numeric arrays
and large data sets with a single data type.
But working with this more tabular type data,
stuff that you would do in Excel or stuff that you do in a database,
it wasn't very easy to do that with NumPy,
or it wasn't really designed for that.
And so that's what led to building this higher-level library
that deals with these tabular data sets in the Pandas library,
which was originally focused on building
with a really close relationship with NumPy.
So Pandas itself was like a thin layer on top of NumPy originally.
One thing I find interesting about Pandas
is it's almost its own programming environment these days
in the sense that traditional Python,
we do a lot of loops.
We do a lot of attribute dereferencing, function calling.
And a lot of what happens in Pandas is more functional.
It's more applied to us.
It's almost like set operations, right?
And a lot of vector operations and so on.
Yeah, and that was behaviors inherited from NumPy.
So NumPy is very array-oriented, vector-oriented.
So rather than write a for loop, you would write an array expression
which would operate on whole batches of data
in a single function call,
which is a lot faster because you can drop down into C code
and get good performance that way.
And so Pandas adopted the NumPy way of the NumPy-like array expression
or vector operations.
But it's true that that's extended to the types of non-numeric data operations
that you can do in Pandas, like vectorized set lookups
where you can say, like, you would say, like,
oh, I have this array of strings and I have this subset of strings
and I want to compute a Boolean array which says whether or not
each string is contained in this set of strings.
And so in Pandas, that's the is-in function.
So you would say, like, you know, column A, like, is in
some set of substrings and that produces,
that single function call produces a whole Boolean array
that you can use for subsetting later on.
Yeah, there's a ton of things that are really interesting in there.
One of the challenges, maybe you could speak to this a little bit,
then I want to come back to your performance comment.
One of the challenges, I think, is that some of these operations
are not super obvious that they exist or that they're discoverable, right?
Like, instead of just indexing into, say, a column,
you can index on an expression that might filter out the columns
or project them or things like that.
How do you recommend people, like, kind of discover
a little bigger breadth of what they can do?
I mean, there's plenty of...
I mean, I think there's great books written about Pandas.
So there's my book, Python for Data Analysis.
I think Matt Harrison has written an excellent book, Effective Pandas.
The Pandas documentation, I think, provides really nitty-gritty detail
about how all the different things work.
But, you know, when I was writing this book, Python for Data Analysis,
my goal was to provide a primer, like a tutorial,
in how to solve data problems with Pandas.
And so for that, I had to introduce some basics of how NumPy works,
so people-oriented computing, basics of Python,
so you know enough Python to be able to understand
what things that Pandas is doing.
But, yeah, it builds incrementally.
And so, like, as you go through the book, the content gets more and more advanced.
It introduces, you master initial set of techniques,
and then you can start learning about more advanced techniques.
So it's definitely a pedagogical resource.
And it is now freely, as you're showing there on the screen,
it is freely available on the internet.
So JJ Allaire helped me port the book to use Quarto,
which is a new technical publishing system for writing books and blogs
and a website, you know, quarto.org.
And there it is.
And, yeah, so that's how I was able to publish my book on the internet,
as, you know, essentially you can use Quarto to write books using notebooks,
which is cool.
My book was written a long time ago in O'Reilly's DocXML,
so not particularly fun to edit.
But, yeah, because Quarto is built on Pandoc,
which is a sort of markup language transpilation system.
So you can use Pandoc to convert from one, you know,
to convert documents from one format to another.
And so that's the kind of the root framework that Quarto is built on for,
you know, generating, starting with one document format
and generating many different types of output formats.
That's cool.
I didn't realize your book was available just to read on the internet.
Yeah, yeah.
So in the third edition, I was able to negotiate with O'Reilly
and make an amendment to my very old book contract from 2011
to let me release the book for free on my website.
So, yeah, it's just available there at westmckinney.com slash book.
I find that, like, a lot of people really like the print book.
And so I think that having the online book just available,
like whenever you are somewhere and you want to look something up, is great.
But, yeah, I've been…
Print books are hard to search.
Yeah, that's true.
That's true, yeah.
And, like, if you go to the search bar and if you go back to the book
and just look at the search bar, you know,
just search for, like, group by, like, all one word or, you know.
Yeah, it's like it comes up really fast.
You can go to that section, and it's pretty cool.
I thought that releasing the book for free online would affect sales,
but people just really like having paper books, it seems, even in 2024.
Yeah.
Even digital books are nice.
You've got them with you all the time.
I think it's about taking the notes.
Where do I put my highlights and how do I remember it?
That's right.
Yeah, yeah, stuff like that.
This quarter thing looks super interesting.
If you look at Pandoc, if people haven't looked at this before,
the conversion matrix, I don't know how you would…
How would you describe this, Wes?
Busy?
Complete?
What is this?
This is crazy.
It's very busy, yeah.
It looks like about 30 or 40 input formats to 50 or 60 output formats,
maybe more than that.
Am I just eyeballing it?
But, yeah, it's pretty impressive.
And then if you took the combinatorial of, like,
how many different ways could you combine the 30 to the 50,
it's kind of what it looks like.
It's truly amazing.
So if you've got Markdown, you want to turn it into a PDF,
or you've got a Doku wiki and you want to turn it into an EPUB or whatever,
or even, like, RevealJS probably to PowerPoint, I would imagine.
I don't know.
Well, as history, like, back story about Quarto,
so it helps to keep in mind that JJ created ColdFusion,
which was this, you know, essentially publishing system,
early publishing system for the internet,
similar to CGI and PHP and other dynamic, you know, web publishing systems.
And so early on at RStudio, they created RMarkdown,
which is basically extensions to Markdown that allow you to have code cells
written in R, and then eventually they added support for some other languages
where it's kind of like a Jupyter Notebook in the sense that you could have
some Markdown and some code and some plots and output,
and you would run the RMarkdown renderer and it would, you know,
generate all the output and insert it into the document.
And so you could use that to write blogs and websites and everything.
But RMarkdown was written in R, and so that limited, in a sense,
like it made it harder to install because you would have to install R to use it.
And also people, you know, it had an association with R
that perhaps was, like, unmerited.
And so in the meantime, you know, with everything that's happened
with web technology, it's now very easy to put a complete JavaScript engine
in a small install footprint, you know, on a machine with no dependencies
and to be able to run a system that is, you know, written in a system
that's written in JavaScript.
And so Cordo is completely language agnostic.
It's written in TypeScript, and it uses Pandoc as an underlying engine,
and it's very easy to install.
And so it addresses some of the portability and, you know,
extents that were in RMarkdown.
But as a result, you know, I think the Posit team had a lot of,
just has more than, you know, a decade, or if you include ColdFusion,
you know, more than 25 years of experience in building
really developer-friendly technical publishing tools.
And so I think that it's not data science,
but it's something that is an important part of the data science workflow,
which is how do you present your, make your analysis and your work
available for consumption in different forms.
And so having this system that can, you know, publish outputs
in many different places is super valuable.
So a lot of people start out in Jupyter Notebooks, but, you know,
but there's many different, you know, many different possible input formats.
And so to be able to, you know, use the same source to publish to a website
or to a confluence page or to a PDF is like super valuable.
Yeah, it's super interesting.
Okay.
So then I got to explore some more.
Let's go back to Pandas for a minute.
First, how about some kind words from the audience for you?
Ravid says, Wes, your work has changed my life.
It's very, very nice.
I'm happy to hear it.
But yeah, I'm more than happy to, yeah, talk in depth about Pandas.
And I think the history of the project is interesting.
And I think also how the project has developed in the intervening 15,
16 years is pretty interesting as well.
Yeah.
Let's talk derivatives for a minute.
So growth and speed of adoption and all those things.
When you first started working on this and you first put it out,
did you foresee a world where this was so popular and so important?
Did you think of, yeah, pretty soon black holes.
I'm pretty sure I'll be part of that somehow.
I mean, it was always the aspiration.
There was the aspiration there of making Python this mainstream language
for statistical computing and data analysis.
I didn't – it didn't occur to me that it would become this popular
or that it would become one of the main tools that people use for working
with data in a business setting.
It would have been – if that was the aspiration or if that was what I needed
to achieve to be satisfied, that would have been completely unreasonable.
And I also don't think that – in a certain sense,
I don't know that its popularity – it is deserved and it's deserved.
I think there's many other worthy efforts that have been created over the years
that have been really great work that others have done in this domain.
And so the fact that Pandas caught on and became as popular as it is,
I think it's a combination of timing and there was a developer relations aspect
that there was content available, and I wrote my book,
and that made it easier for people to learn how to use the project.
But also we had a serendipitous open-source developer community
that came together that led the project to grow and expand really rapidly
in the early 2010s.
And I definitely spent a lot of work recruiting people to work on the project
and encouraging others to work on it because sometimes people create
open-source projects and then it's hard for others to get involved
and get a seat at the table, so to speak.
But I was very keen to bring on others and to give them responsibility
and ultimately hand over the reins to the project to others.
And I've spoken a lot about that over the years, how important that is
for open-source project creators to make room for others in growing the project
so that they can become owners of it as well.
It's tough to make space and tough to bring on folks.
Have you heard of the Djangonauts?
I think it's djangonauts.space.
They have an awesome domain.
But it's basically kind of like a boot camp, but it's for taking people
who just like Django and turning them into actually contributors
or core contributors.
What's your onboarding story for people who do want to participate?
I'm embarrassed to say that I don't have a comprehensive view of all
of the different community outreach channels that the Pandas project
has done to help grow new contributors.
So one of the core team members, Mark Garcia, has done an amazing job
organizing documentation sprints and other contributor sourcing events,
essentially creating very friendly accessible events where people
who are interested in getting involved in Pandas can meet each other
and then assist each other in making their first pull request.
And it could be something as simple as making a small improvement
to the Pandas documentation because it's such a large project.
The documentation is always something that could be made better,
either adding more examples or documenting things that aren't documented
or just making the documentation better.
And so it's something that for new contributors is more accessible
than working on the internals of one of the algorithms or something.
Or working on some significant performance improvement
might be a bit intimidating.
If you've never worked on the Pandas code base, it's a pretty large code base
because it's been worked on continuously for going on 20 years.
So it takes a while to really get to a place where you can be productive,
and that can be discouraging for new contributors,
especially those who don't have a lot of open source experience.
That's one of the ironies or challenges of these big projects
is they're just so finely polished.
So many people are using them.
Every edge case matters to somebody, right?
And so to become a contributor and make changes to that,
it takes a while, I'm sure.
Yeah.
I mean, I think it's definitely a big thing that helped is allowing people
to get paid to work on Pandas or to be able to contribute to Pandas
as part of their job description,
as maybe part of their job is maintaining Pandas.
So Anaconda was one of the earliest companies who had engineers on staff,
like Brock Mendel, Tom Augsberger, Jeff Reback,
who part of their job was maintaining and developing Pandas.
And that was huge because prior to that, the project was purely based on volunteers.
Like I was a volunteer and everyone was working on the project
as a passion project in their free time.
And then Travis Oliphant, one of the founders,
he and Peter Wang founded Anaconda.
Travis went out from Anaconda to create Quonsight
and has continued to sponsor development in and around Pandas.
And that's enabled people like Mark to do these community-building events
and for it to not be something that's totally uncompensated.
Yeah, that's a lot of stuff going on.
And I think the interest is awesome, right?
I mean, there's just a different level of problems.
I feel like you can take on, you know,
I got this entire week and that's my job to make this work
rather than I've got two hours and I can't really take on a huge project
and so I'll work on the smaller improvements or whatever.
Yeah, but I think many people know,
but I haven't been involved day-to-day in Pandas since 2013.
So that's getting on.
That's a lot of years.
You know, I still talk to the Pandas contributors.
We had a Pandas meetup, core developer meetup here in Nashville pre-COVID.
I think it was in 2019 maybe.
So I'm still in active contact with the Pandas developers,
but it's been a different team of people leading the project.
It's taken on a life of its own, which is amazing.
That's exactly, as a project creator, that's exactly what you want.
It's to not be beholden to the project that you created
and forced and have to be responsible for it
and take care of it for the rest of your life.
But if you look at a lot of the most intensive community development
has happened since I moved on to work on other projects.
So now the project has, I don't know the exact count,
but it's had thousands of contributors.
So to have thousands of different unique individuals
contributing to an open source project, it's a big deal.
I don't know what it says on the bottom of GitHub.
It says, you know, 3,200 contributors,
but that's maybe not even the full story
because sometimes people don't have their email address associated
with their GitHub profile.
And how GitHub counts contributors,
I would say probably the true number is closer to 4,000.
Wow.
Yeah, but I think that's a testament to the core team
and all the outreach that they've done
and making the project accessible and easy to contribute to.
Because if you go and try to make a pull request to a project,
there's many different ways that you can fail.
So either the project is technically,
there's issues with the build system or the developer tooling,
and so you struggle with the developer tooling.
And so if you aren't working on it every day and every night,
you can't make heads or tails of how the developer tools work.
But then there's also the level of accessibility
of the core development team.
If they aren't there to support you in getting involved in the project
and learning how it works and creating documentation to be viewed
and what's expected of you,
that can also be a source of frustration
where people churn out of the project
because it's too hard to find their sea legs.
And maybe also sometimes development teams are unfriendly or unhelpful
or they make others feel like they're annoyed with them
or they're wasting their time or something.
It's like, I don't want to look at this pull request
and give you feedback because I could do it more quickly by myself or something.
Sometimes you see that in open source projects.
But they've created a very welcoming environment,
and I think the contribution numbers speak for themselves.
They definitely do.
Maybe the last thing before we move on to the other stuff you're working on,
but the other interesting GitHub statistic here
is the used by 1.6 million projects.
I don't know if I've ever seen it used by that high.
There's probably some that are higher, but not many.
Yeah, it's a lot of projects.
I think it's interesting.
I think it's, like many projects,
it's reached a point where it's an essential and assumed part
of many people's toolkit.
The first thing that they write at the top of a file that they're working on
is import pandas as PD or import NumPy as PD.
I think one of the reasons why pandas has gotten so popular
is that it is beneficial to the community,
to the Python community, to have fewer solutions.
Kind of the zen of Python, there should be one
and preferably only one obvious way to do things.
If there were 10 different pandas-like projects,
that creates skill portability problems.
It's just easier if everyone says,
oh, pandas is the thing that we use.
Change jobs, and you can take all your skills,
like how to use pandas with you.
I think that's also one of the reasons why Python
has become so successful in the business world
is because you can teach somebody,
even without a lot of programming experience,
how to use Python, how to use pandas,
and become productive doing basic work very quickly.
One of the solutions, I remember back in the early 2010s,
there were a lot of articles and talks about
how to address the data science shortage.
My belief, and I gave a talk at Web Summit in Dublin in 2000,
gosh, maybe 2017, I have to look exactly.
But basically, it was the data scientist shortage,
and my thesis was always,
we should make it easier to be a data scientist,
or lower the bar for what sort of skills
you have to master before you can do productive work
in a business setting.
I think the fact that there is just pandas,
and that's the one thing that people have to learn how to use,
is their essential starting point for doing any data work,
has also led to this piling on of people being motivated
to make this one thing better,
because you make improvements to pandas,
and they benefit millions of projects
and millions of people around the world.
So it's like a steady snowballing effect.
I agree with you, and I think doing data science
is getting easier.
We've got a lot of interesting frameworks and tools,
for Python, one of them, right,
that makes it easier to share and run your code.
Yeah, so I think the Shiny for Python,
Streamlet, Dash,
like these different interactive data application
publishing frameworks,
you can go from a few lines of pandas code,
loading some data and doing some analysis and visualization
to pushing that as an interactive website
without having to know how to use
any web development frameworks or Node.js
or anything like that.
And so to be able to get up and running
and build a working interactive web application
that's powered by Python,
yeah, it's a game changer in terms of shortening
end-to-end development life cycles.
What do you think about JupyterLite
and these PyOxidize and basically Jupyter
in a browser type of things?
Yeah.
WebAssembly and all that.
Yeah, so I'm definitely very excited about it,
been following WebAssembly in general,
and so I guess some people listening
will know about WebAssembly,
but basically it's a portable machine code
that can be compiled and executed
within your browser in a sandbox environment,
so it protects against security issues
and prevents the person who wrote the WebAssembly code
from doing something malicious on your machine,
which is very important.
Won't necessarily stop them from mining cryptocurrency
while you have the browser tab open.
That's a whole separate problem.
But yeah, I think it's enabled us
to run the whole scientific Python stack,
including Jupyter and NumPy and Pandas
totally in the browser without having a client and server
and needing to run a container someplace in the cloud.
And so I think in terms of creating application deployment,
so like being able to deploy an interactive data application,
like with Shiny, for example,
without needing to have a server,
that's actually pretty amazing.
And so I think that simplifies and opens up new use cases,
like new application architectures
and makes things a lot easier.
Because setting up and running a server
creates brittleness, like it has cost.
And so if the browser is doubling as your server process,
I think that's really cool.
You also have other projects like DuckDB,
which is a high-performance embeddable analytic SQL engine.
And so now with DuckDB compiled to Wasm,
you can get a high-performance database
running in your browser.
And so you can get low-latency interactive queries
and interactive dashboards.
And so WebAssembly has opened up
this whole kind of new world of possibilities,
and so it's transformative, I think.
I think for Python in particular,
you mentioned PyDyed,
which is kind of a whole package stack.
So it's like a framework for build and build and packaging
and basically building an application
and managing its dependencies
so you could create a WebAssembly version
of your application to be deployed like this.
But yeah, so I think one of the PyDyed,
either the PyDyed main creator or maintainer went to Anaconda,
and they created PyScript,
which is another attempt to make it even easier
to use Python to create web applications,
interactive web applications.
And yeah, so there's so many cool things here.
Like in the R community, they have WebR,
which is similar to PyScript and PyDyed in some ways,
like compiling the whole R stack to WebAssembly.
There was just an article I saw on Hacker News
where they worked on figuring out
how to trick LLVM into compiling Fortran code,
like legacy Fortran code, to WebAssembly
because when you're talking about all of this
scientific computing stack,
you need the linear algebra
and all of the 40 years of Fortran code
that have been built to support scientific applications.
You need all that to compile too and run in the browser.
Yeah, that's pretty wild to think of putting that in there,
but very useful.
I didn't realize that you could use DuckDB
as a WebAssembly component.
That's pretty cool.
Yeah, there's a company.
I'm not an investor or plugging them or anything,
but it's called Evidence.dev,
and it's like a whole business intelligence,
open source business intelligence application
that's powered by DuckDB.
And so if you have data that fits in the browser,
to have a whole interactive dashboard
or to be able to do business intelligence
fully in the browser with no need of a server,
it's very, very cool.
I've been following DuckDB since the early days,
and my company, Voltron Data,
we became members of the DuckDB Foundation
and actively built a relationship with DuckDB Labs
so we could help accelerate progress in this space
because I think the impact is so immense,
and it's hard to predict what people are going to build
with all this stuff.
And so that was all with, I guess,
going back 15 years ago to Python,
one of the reasons I became so passionate
about building stuff for Python was about,
I think the way that Peter Wang puts it
is giving people superpowers.
So we want to enable people to build things
with much less code and much less time.
And so by making things that much more accessible,
that much easier to do,
and the mantra in Pandas was how do we make things,
one line of code, that must be easy,
it's one line of code, one line of code,
it must be, make this as terse and simple as possible
so that you can move on and focus on building
the more interesting parts of your application
rather than struggling with how to read a CSV file
or how to do whichever data munging technique
that you need for your dataset.
Maybe an interesting mental model for DuckDB
is kind of an equivalent to SQLite,
but more analytics database for folks,
in process and things, right?
What do you think?
Yeah, so DuckDB is like SQLite,
and in fact it can run the whole SQLite test suite,
I believe, so it's a full database,
but it's for analytic processing,
so it's optimized for analytic processing
and as compared with SQLite,
which is not, it's not designed for data processing.
Yeah, cool.
All right, well, let's talk about some things
that you're working on beyond Pandas.
You talked about Apache Arrow earlier.
What are you doing with Arrow and how does it fit in your world?
Yeah, so the back story there was,
I don't know if you can hear the sirens
in downtown Nashville, but...
No, actually.
That's good.
The microphone filters it out pretty well.
Yay for dynamic microphones.
They're amazing.
Yeah, so around the mid-2010s, 2015,
I started working at Cloudera,
which is a company that was one of the pioneers
in the big data ecosystem,
and I had spent several years working on,
five, six years working on Pandas,
and so I had gone through the experience
of building Pandas from top to bottom,
and it was this full stack system
that had its own mini query engine,
all of its own algorithms and data structures
and all the stuff that we had to build from scratch,
and I started thinking about,
what if it was possible to build
some of the underlying computing technology
like data readers, like file readers,
all the algorithms that power the core components of Pandas,
like group operations, aggregations, filtering, selection,
all those things.
What if it were possible to have a general-purpose library
that isn't specific to Python,
but is really, really fast, really efficient,
and has a large community building it
so that you could take that code with you
and use it to build many different types of libraries,
not just data frame libraries,
but also database engines and stream processing engines
and all kinds of things,
and so that was kind of what was in my mind
when I started getting interested
in what turned into Arrow,
and one of the problems we realized we needed to solve,
this was like a group of other open-source developers and me,
was that we needed to create a way to represent data
that was not tied to a specific programming language
and that could be used for a very efficient interchange
between components,
and the idea is that you would have this immutable,
like this kind of constant data structure,
which is like it's the same in every programming language,
and then you can use that as the basis
for writing all of your algorithms.
So as long as it's Arrow,
you have these reusable algorithms
that process Arrow data.
So we started with building the Arrow format
and standardizing it,
and then we built a whole ecosystem of components,
like library components
and different programming languages
for building applications that use the Arrow format,
so that includes not only tools for building
and interacting with the data,
but also file readers,
so you can read CSV files and JSON data and Parquet files,
read data out of database systems.
Wherever the data comes from,
we want to have an efficient way to get it into the Arrow format,
and then we moved on to building data processing engines
that are native to the Arrow format,
so that Arrow goes in, the data's processed,
Arrow goes out.
So DuckDB, for example,
supports Arrow as a preferred input format
and DuckDB is more or less Arrow-like in its internals.
It has Arrow format plus a number of extensions
that are DuckDB-specific for better performance
within the context of DuckDB.
And so in numerous communities,
so there's the Rust community,
which has built DataFusion,
which is an execution engine for Arrow,
SQL engine for Arrow.
And so, yeah, we've kind of looked
at the different layers of the stack,
like data access, computing, data transport,
everything under the sun,
and then we've built libraries
that are across many different programming languages
that you can pick and choose the pieces
that you need to build your system.
And the goal ultimately was that we,
in the future, which is now,
we don't want people to have to reinvent the wheel
whenever they're building something like Pandas,
that they could just pick up these off-the-shelf components,
they can design the developer experience,
the user experience that they want to create,
and they can get built.
So if you were building Pandas now,
you could build a Pandas-like library
based on the Arrow components in much less time,
and it would be fast and efficient
and interoperable with the whole ecosystem
of other projects that use Arrow.
So it's very cool.
I mean, it was really ambitious.
In some ways obvious to people,
they would hear about Arrow,
and they'd say, that sounds obvious.
Like, clearly we should have a universal way
of transporting data between systems
and processing it in memory.
Why hasn't this been done in the past?
And it turns out that, as is true
with many open-source software problems,
that many of these problems are,
the social problems are harder
than the technical problems.
And so if you can solve the kind of people coordination
and consensus problems,
solving the technical issues
is much easier by comparison.
So I think we were lucky in that
we found the right group of people,
the right personalities,
where we were able to,
as soon as I met Jacques Nadeau,
who had been at MapR
and was working on his startup, Dremio,
I knew instantly when I met Jacques Nadeau,
it's like, I can work,
it's like him,
he's going to help me make this happen.
When I met Julien Ledam,
who had also co-created Parquet,
I was like, yes,
we are going to make this,
I found the right people,
we are going to make this happen.
So it's been a labor of love
and much work and stress and everything.
I've been working on things,
circling, with Aero as the sun,
I've been building satellites and moons and planets,
circling the Aero sun
over the last eight years or so,
and that's kept me pretty busy.
Yeah, it's only getting more exciting and interesting.
Over here it says,
it uses efficient analytic operations
on modern hardware like CPUs and GPUs.
One of the big challenges of Python
has been the GIL,
also one of its big benefits,
but one of its challenges
when you get to multicore or computational stuff
has been the GIL.
What's the story here?
Yeah, so in AeroLand,
when we're talking about analytic efficiency,
it mainly has to do with the underlying,
how a modern CPU works
or how a GPU works.
And so when the data is arranged
in column-oriented format,
that enables the data
to be moved efficiently
through the CPU cache pipelines,
so the data is made available efficiently
to the CPU cores.
And so we spent a lot of energy in Aero
making decisions,
firstly, to enable very cache-efficient,
like CPU cache or GPU cache-efficient analytics
on the data.
And so we were kind of always,
we were deciding,
we would break ties and make decisions
based on what's going to be more efficient
for the computer chip.
The other thing is that modern,
and this is true with GPUs,
which have a different parallelism model
or a different kind of multicore parallelism model
than CPUs,
but in CPUs,
they've focused on adding
what are called
single instruction multiple data,
intrinsic,
like built-in operations in the processor
where now you can process
up to 512 bytes of data
in a single CPU instruction.
And so that's like,
my brain's doing the math right,
like 16 32-bit floats
or eight 64-bit integers
in a single cycle.
There's like intrinsic operations
You could multiply this number by that one,
multiply that number to these eight things
all at once,
something like that.
That's right, yeah.
Or you might say like,
oh, I have a bit mask
and I want to select,
I want to gather
like the one bits that are set
in this bit mask
from this array of integers.
And so there's like a gather instruction
which allows you to select a subset,
a sort of SIMD vector of integers
using a bit mask.
And so that turns out to be
a pretty critical operation
in certain data analytic workloads.
So yeah, we were really,
we wanted to have a data format
that was essentially future-proofed
in the sense that
it's ideal for the coming wave,
like current generation of CPUs,
but also given that a lot of processing
is moving to GPUs and to FPGAs
and to custom silicon,
like we wanted Arrow
to be usable there as well.
And Arrow has been successfully
used as the foundation
of GPU computing libraries
like we kind of at Voltron Data
built a whole accelerator native,
GPU native,
scalable execution engine
that's Arrow-based.
And so I think the fact that we,
that was our aspiration
and we've been able to prove that out
in real-world workloads
and show the kinds of efficiency gains
that you can get with
using modern computing hardware correctly
or at least as well
as it's intended to be used.
That's a big deal
in terms of like making applications faster,
reducing the carbon footprint
of large-scale data workloads,
things like that.
Yeah, amazing.
All right, let's see,
what else have I got on deck here
to talk to you about?
Let's...
Maybe we can talk about...
We got a little time left.
We got a couple of things to cover.
Yeah, we can talk about this.
Yeah, we could probably
spend another hour talking.
Yes, easy.
I think one of the more interesting areas
in recent years
has been new DataFrame libraries
and DataFrame APIs
that transpile or compile
to different,
execute on different backends.
And so around the time
that I was helping start Arrow,
I created this project called Ibis,
which is basically
a portable DataFrame API
that knows how to generate SQL queries
and compile to Pandas and Polars
and different DataFrame backends.
And the goal is to provide
a really productive DataFrame API
that gives you portability
across different execution backends
with the goal of enabling
what we call the multi-engine data stack.
So you aren't stuck
with using one particular system
because all of the code that you've written
is specialized to that system.
You have this tool, which...
So maybe you could work with,
you know, DuckDB on your laptop
or Pandas or Polars
with Ibis on your laptop.
But if you have...
If you need to run that workload
someplace else,
maybe with, you know,
ClickHouse or BigQuery,
or maybe it's a large big data workload
that's too big to fit on your laptop
and you need to use Spark SQL
or something,
that you can just ask Ibis,
say, hey, I want to do the same thing
on this larger dataset over here.
And it has all the logic
to generate the correct,
you know, query representation
and run that workload for you.
So it's super useful.
But there's a whole wave of, like,
you know, work right now
to help enable people
to work in a Pandas-like way,
but get work with big data
or, you know, get better performance
than Pandas,
because Pandas is a Swiss Army knife
but isn't a chainsaw,
so it isn't...
You know, if you were rebuilding Pandas
from scratch,
it would end up a lot...
You know, there's areas
of the projects
that are more bloated
or have performance overhead
that's hard to get rid of.
And so that's why you have, you know,
Richie Fink started the Polars project,
which is kind of a reimagining
of Pandas data frames
written in Rust
and exposed in Python.
And Polars, of course,
is built on Apache Arrow
at its core.
So, you know,
building an Arrow-native
data frame library in Rust
and, you know, all the benefits
that come with, you know,
building Python extensions in Rust,
you know, you avoid the gill
and you can manage
the multithreading
in a system's language,
all that fun stuff.
Yeah, when you're talking about Arrow
and supporting different ways
of using it and things being built on it,
certainly Polars came to mind for me.
You know, when you talk about Ibis,
I think it's interesting
that a lot of these
data frame libraries,
they try to base their API
to be Pandas-like
but not identical, potentially,
you know, thinking of Dask
and others.
But this Ibis
sort of has the ability
to configure it and extend it
and make it different,
kind of like, for example, Dask,
which is one of the backends here.
Yeah.
It does, but the API doesn't change, right?
It just talks to the different backends.
Yeah, there's different schools
of thought on this.
So there's another project
called Modin,
which is similar to Ibis
in many ways
in the sense of, like,
transpilation and sort of dynamically
supporting different backends
but sought to closely emulate
the, you know, exact details
of, like, you know,
the API call,
the function name,
our function arguments
must be exactly the same
as Pandas with the goal
of being a drop-in replacement
for people's Pandas code.
And that's one approach,
kind of the Pandas emulation route.
And there's a library called Koalas
for Spark,
which is like a PySpark
emulation layer for the Pandas API.
And then there's other projects
like Polars and Ibis
and Dask DataFrame
that take, like,
design cues from Pandas
in the sense of, like,
the general way
in which the API works
but has made meaningful departures
in the interest of doing things better
in many ways than Pandas did
in certain parts of the API
and making things simpler
and not being beholden,
like, beholden to decisions
that were made in Pandas,
you know, 15 years ago.
Not to say there's anything bad
about the Pandas API,
but, like, with any API,
it's large.
Like, it's very large,
as evidenced by, you know,
the 2,000 pages of documentation.
And so I understand the desire
to make things simpler
while also refining certain things,
making certain types of workloads
easier to express.
And so Polars, for example,
is very expression-based.
And so everything is column expressions
and is lazy
and not eagerly computed,
whereas Pandas is eager execution
just like NumPy is,
which is how Pandas, you know,
became eagerly executed
in the first place.
And so I think the mantra with Polars
was we don't want to support
the eager execution by default
that Pandas provides.
We want to be able to build expressions
so that we can do query optimization
and take inefficient code
and under the hood rewrite it
to, you know, be more efficient,
which is, you know,
what you can do with a query optimizer.
So ultimately, like,
and that matters a lot
when you're executing code remotely
or in, like, a big data system,
that you want to have the freedom
to be able to take, like,
a lazy, you know, analytic expression
and rewrite it, you know, based on.
It might be like you need to
seriously rewrite the expression
in the case of, like, Dask, for example.
Like, Dask has to do
planning across a distributed cluster.
And so, you know,
Dask DataFrame is very Pandas-like,
but it also includes
some explicit details
of being able to control
how the data is partitioned
and being able to have some knobs
to turn in terms of, like,
having more control
over what's happening
on a distributed cluster.
And I think the goal there
is, like, to give the developer
more control as opposed to, like,
trying to be intelligent, you know,
make all of the decisions
on behalf of the developer.
So if you, you know,
if you know about how, you know,
know a lot about your data set,
then you can make more,
you can make, you know,
decisions about how to schedule
and execute it.
Of course, Dask is building,
you know, query optimization
to start making more of those decisions
on behalf of the user.
But, you know, Dask has become
very popular and impactful
in making distributed computing
easier in Python.
So they've gotten, you know,
I think gotten a long way
without turning into a database.
And I think Dask never aspired
to be a database engine,
which is a lot of distributed computing
is, you know, not database-like.
It could be distributed array computing
or distributed model training
and just being able to easily run
distributed, you know,
Python functions on a cluster
and do distributed computing that way.
It was amazing, like,
how many people were using
PySpark in the early days
just for the convenience
of being able to run Python functions
in parallel on a cluster.
Yeah, and that's pretty interesting
and not exactly what it's designed for.
Right.
With Dask, you know,
you probably come across situations
where you do a sequence of operations.
They're kind of commutative
in the end in practice,
but from a computational perspective,
like, how do I distribute this
amongst different servers?
Maybe one order matters
a lot more than the other
out of performance, you know?
Yeah.
Interesting.
All right.
One final thing.
SQLGLOT?
Yeah.
So, SQLGLOT project started
by Toby Mao.
So, he's a Netflix alum
and, you know,
really talented developer
who's created this SQL query
transpilation framework library
for Python and, you know,
kind of underlying core library.
And so, the problem
that's being solved there
is that SQL, despite being
a quote-unquote standard,
is not at all standardized
across different database systems.
And so, if you want to take
your SQL queries written
for one engine
and use them someplace else,
without something like SQLGLOT,
you would have to manually rewrite
and make sure you get the typecasting
and coalescing rules correct.
And so, SQLGLOT understands
the intricacies and the quirks
of every database dialect,
SQL dialect,
and knows how to correctly translate
from one dialect to another.
And so, IBIS now uses SQLGLOT
as its underlying engine
for query transpilation
and generating SQL outputs.
So, originally, IBIS had its own
kind of bad version of SQLGLOT,
kind of a query transpilation,
like SQL transpilation
that was powered by, I think,
powered by SQLAlchemy
and a bunch of custom code.
And so, I think they've been able
to delete a lot in IBIS
by moving to SQLGLOT.
And I know that, you know,
SQLGLOT is also being used
to power kind of a new,
yeah, being used in people
building new products
that are Python-powered,
things like that.
So, and Toby, like,
his company, Tobiko Data,
they're building a product
called SQL Mesh
that's powered by SQLGLOT.
So, very cool project
and maybe a bit in the weeds,
but if you've ever needed
to convert a SQL query
from one dialect to another,
it's, yeah, SQLGLOT is here
to save the day.
I would say, you know,
even simple things
is how do you specify
a parameter variable,
you know, for a parameterized query,
right?
And Microsoft SQL Server,
it's like at the parameter name
and Oracle, it's like question mark
or SQLite, I think it's also,
you know, just that,
even those simple things.
It's a pain.
Yeah.
And without it,
you end up with little bobby tables,
which is also not good, so.
That's true.
Nobody wants to talk to him.
Yeah, this is really cool.
SQLGLOT, like polyglot,
but all the languages of SQL.
Nice.
And you do things like,
you can say,
read DuckDB and write to Hive
or read DuckDB
and then write to Spark
or whatever.
It's pretty cool.
Yeah.
All right, Wes,
I think we're getting short on time,
but, you know,
I know everybody appreciated
hearing from you
and hearing what you're up to these days.
Anything you want to add
before we wrap up?
I don't think so.
Yeah.
I enjoyed the conversation
and yeah.
Yeah, there's a lot of stuff,
a lot of stuff going on
and still plenty of things
to get excited about.
So I think often people feel like,
you know,
all the exciting problems
in the Python ecosystem
have been solved,
but there's still a lot to do
and yeah,
we've made a lot of progress
in the last,
you know,
15 plus years,
but, you know,
in some ways it feels like
we're just getting started.
We are just getting started.
Excited to see where things go next.
Yeah, every time I think,
oh, all the problems are solved,
then you discover all these new things
that are so creative
and you're like,
oh, that was a big problem
I didn't even know was a problem.
It's great.
Yeah, well,
all right.
Thank you for being here
and taking the time
and yeah,
keep us updated on what you're up to.
Sounds good.
All right.